# Introduction

## Terms

The following terms are used in this document:

-   **Trained ML model**: the conceptual structure of graphs and
    operators that maps a set of input tensors to a set of output
    tensors. The Trained ML Model Description (TMD) is represented using
    the *Trained Model Description Language* (TMDL).

-   **Trained ML Model Description** (TMD: a concrete representation of
    the conceptual trained ML Model that can be interpreted by a human
    or a program.

-   **Trained ML Model Description** **Language** (TMDL): The language
    used to represent a *Trained ML Model* (TMD).

## Contents

This document gives a first definition of the activities to be carried
out by the ONNX safety-related profile workgroup. This "workplan" is
aimed at being presented *and discussed* during the Workgroup kick-off
meeting planned for the end of September.

## Main objectives

Provide a definition of the formalism used to represent a trained ML
model\...

-   *\... that has an understandable and non ambiguous syntax and
    semantics.*

    The description of the ML model expressed using this formalism must
    be a Low level Requirement for the implementation phase in the sense
    that its interpretation and implementation shall not require any
    further information that the one given by the description of the ML
    model.

-   *\... that allows multiple levels of accuracy and precision for the
    description of a given model.*

    The language used to describe the model (i.e., its syntax and
    semantics) must be non ambiguous, but a model may be ambiguous if
    this ambiguity is acceptable or even necessary to leave some freedom
    to the implementer (e.g., for optimization). The objective is to
    identify, control, and possibly remove this ambiguity by an
    appropriate refinement of the ML model description.

# Workgroup Activities

This section presents the different activities of the workgroup. Their
dependencies are expressed via their inputs/outputs.

### A1 - Elicitation of industrial needs and requirements

#### Objectives

-   Elicit end-users needs related to the ONNX format, i.e., What are
    the activities using ONNX models?, What are the evidences required
    by certification authorities that involve the ONNX model[^1]?, How
    do the ONNX model impact these activities?,

-   Elicit requirements applicable to the ONNX standard to satisfy the
    end-users needs. Those requirements shall cover all aspects of the
    standard, including documentation, graphs and operators semantics,
    file format, reference implementation, etc.

#### Rationales {#rationales .unnumbered}

Clarify the expectation of end-users. Ensure that the requirements for
ONNX are traceable to one or several end-users' needs.

#### Inputs

-   Certification standards (e.g., ARP6983, ISO/DPAS 8800,
    ECSS-E-HB-40-02A DIR1, etc.)

-   Company-specific requirements

#### Outputs

-   D1.a.\<x\>: End users needs and requirements for domain \<x\>.

#### Detailed activities

The activities defined below are per domain.

##### End-Users Needs Elicitation

-   UNAct1: Definition of the *Trained Model Description (TMD)* artefact
    (e.g., the Machine Learning Model Description (MLMD) in ARP6983)

-   UNAct2: Description (overview) of the machine learning development
    process

-   UNAct3: Description of the development process objectives and
    activities that:
    -   Produce the TMD
    -   Take the TMD as input

-   UNAct4: Description of the development process verification
    objectives and activities that apply to the TMD

-   UNAct5: Constraints on the TDM, that come from:
    -   the Development and verification activities
    -   the Industrial context

-   UNAct6: Expression of the needs

##### *ONNX Requirements Expression*

The activities below take the end-user needs as inputs

-   ORAct1: Definition of the list of the aspects to which the
    requirements for a safety-related ONNX profile will apply, e.g.,
    -   Semantics of the operators
    -   Semantics of the graph
    -   Data types
    -   Metamodel
    -   Concrete syntax (format)
    -   Documentation
    -   Traceability
    -   Versioning
    -   etc.

-   ORAct2: For each aspect of the list, definition of the requirements
    *Examples of requirements that may be expressed:*
    -   The semantics of the Trained Model Description Language (TMDL) used
    to describe the TMD shall be defined both informally (for
    documentation purposes) and formally using a mathematically-grounded
    language. This covers all that is needed for tooled and/or human
    interpretation of any valid TMD described using the TMDL (including,
    (e.g., operators and graphs).
    -   The formal definition of the TMDL shall define precisely and
    accurately the expected results of the interpretation of any valid
    TMDL model. The level of precision and accuracy may be a parameter
    of the description of the semantics.
    -   A reference implementation shall be provided for each operator. The
    reference implementation shall be accompanied with all the necessary
    information describing the execution environment used to validate
    compliance with the formal specification.
    -   In the TMD, it should be possible to indicate the meaning of each
    dimension of the tensors

### A2: Consolidate Requirements for the ONNX profile

#### Objectives

-   Consolidate, filter, and prioritize the requirements identified for
    the different industrial domains in D1.a.\<x\>.

-   Discriminate requirements aimed at the preservation of the model
    semantics from requirements aimed at facilitating / supporting other
    development assurance activities.

#### Rationale

The ONNX Safety-related profile must be unique whereas the needs comes
from different industrial domains, referring different certification
standards. This activity is aimed at defining a consensual and
consistent set of requirements.

#### Inputs

-   D1.a.\<x\>: End users needs and requirements for domain \<x\>.

#### Outputs

-   (D2.a) ONNX safety-related Profile Requirements

#### Detailed activities

##### Consolidation of requirements

-   CRAct1: Consolidation and fusion of semantically equivalent
    requirements

-   CRAct2: Grouping and prioritization of requirements

### A3: Definition of the Scope of the ONNX Safety related profile

#### Objectives

-   Selection of the set of operators and constructs to be considered in
    the Safety-related profile.

#### Rationale

In order to keep the effort reasonable and maximize or chance to produce
useful results within a reasonable time frame, we propose to work on a
restricted set of operators and constructs. This set will be defined
according to the actual needs of the end-users (i.e., the models they
want to implement).

#### Inputs

-   End user use cases

#### Outputs

-   (D3.a) Safety-related Profile Scope Definition

#### Detailed activities

##### Definition of the Safety-related Standard Scope

-   DSCAct1: Identification/definition of the Safety-related industrial
    use case reference models

-   DSCAct2: Extraction of the operators and constructs from the
    Safety-related industrial use cases reference models

-   DSCAct3: Consolidation of the TMDL operators and constructs for the
    Safety-related profile, from the reference models possibly augmented
    with necessary additional operators and constructs.

### A4: Analysis of the ONNX standard

#### Objectives

-   Identify the parts of the standard that need to be updated /
    clarified / modified in order to comply with the Safety-related
    Profile Requirements defined in D2.a, for the subset of the standard
    identified in D3.a.

#### Rationales

Once the requirements for the format are defined, the work consists to
find what needs to be described, improved, fixed,\... in the existing
ONNX standard. In particular, all elements that are unclear or which
interpretation is left to the implementer shall be spotted, analysed,
discussed, and a proposal for clarification/correction may be proposed
if required. These proposals may be applicable to a whole part of the
standard e.g. a recommendation may concern the documentation of all
operators).

#### Inputs

-   (D2.a) Requirements applicable to the ONNX profile

-   (D3.a) Safety-related Profile Scope Definition

#### Outputs

-   (D4.a) ONNX Analysis and Recommendations for the Safety-related
    Profile

#### Detailed activities

##### Analysis of the ONNX standard

-   AnaAct1: Analysis of the compliance of the ONNX standard with
    respect to each of the requirements and identification of
    non-compliances.

-   AnaAct2: Provision of recommendations, solutions, guidance to modify
    the ONNX standard.

### A5: Elaboration of the specification guidelines

#### Objectives

State of the Art and proposal of guidelines for the specification of the
graph and operators to comply with D4.a.

#### Rationales

Various approaches and notations may be used to specify the graph and
operators in a formal way. This activity is aimed at proposing a
solution acceptable with respect to the end-users needs and
requirements.

#### Inputs

-   (D2.a) Requirements applicable to the ONNX profile

#### Outputs

-   (D5.a) Specification Guidelines

#### Detailed activities

##### Prototype guidelines

-   ProAct1: Elaborate a first set of (informal + formal) specification
    guidelines and apply them on a few operators (e.g., conv) and
    constructs in order to discussed and reviewed by the workgroup

##### Elaborate guidelines

-   â€¢ ElaAct1: Elaborate the final set of guidelines (including
    notation, presentation of the specification, etc. to ensure a
    consistent presentation of the specification)

### A6: Development of the ONNX Safety-related profile - semantics

#### Objectives

Development of the ONNX Safety-related profile semantics to address
issues identified in (D4.a), using the formalism and approach defined in
D5.a

#### Inputs

-   (D4.a) ONNX Analysis and Recommendations for the Safety-related
    Profile

-   (D5.a) Formal Specification Guidelines

#### Outputs

-   (D6.a) ONNX Safety-related profile (graph execution part)

-   (D6.b) ONNX Safety-related profile (operators part)

-   (D6.c) ONNX Safety-related profile reference implementation

Detailed activities *To be completed.*

### A7: Development of the ONNX Satefy-related profile - format

#### Objectives

Development of the ONNX Safety-related exchange format in compliance
with the recommendations given in (D4.a).

#### Inputs

-   (D4.a) ONNX Analysis for the Safety-related Profile

-   ONNX standard

#### Outputs

-   (D7.a) ONNX Safety-related profile format

#### Detailed activities

*To be completed.*

### A8: Verification of the ONNX Safety-related profile

#### Objectives

Verification of the ONNX Safety-related profile vs the requirements
expressed in (D2.a), the recommendations identified in (D4.a) and the
guidelines defined in (D5.a)

#### Inputs

-   (D4.a) ONNX Analysis and Recommendations for the Safety-related
    Profile

-   (D5.a) Formal Specification Guidelines

-   (D6.a) ONNX Safety-related profile (graph execution part)

-   (D6.b) ONNX Safety-related profile (operators part)

-   (D6.c) ONNX Safety-related profile reference implementation

-   (D7.a) ONNX Safety-related profile format

#### Outputs

-   (D8.a) ONNX Safety-related profile verification report

Detailed activities *To be completed.*

### A9: Validation of the ONNX Safety-related profile

#### Objectives

Validation of the ONNX Safety-related profile vs the End-users needs
expressed in the various per domain D1.a.\<x\> documents.

#### Inputs

-   D1.a.\<x\>: End users needs and requirements for domain \<x\>.

-   (D6.a) ONNX Safety-related profile (graph execution part)

-   (D6.b) ONNX Safety-related profile (operators part)

-   (D6.c) ONNX Safety-related profile reference implementation

-   (D7.a) ONNX Safety-related profile format

#### Outputs

-   (D9.a) ONNX Safety-related profile validation report

Detailed activities *To be completed.*

[^1]: E.g., those concerning the MLMD in the ARP6983/ED-324.
